[Music]
uh I'm Elliot Gerson uh from the Aspen
Institute and I am really delighted to
be able to uh host this film uh and
particularly to have a conversation with
these two distinguished gentlemen
afterwards uh baric Goodman uh Bravo the
director of this extraordinary film uh
you can see why Ken Burns the executive
producer would get involved with this
film and this project only if if baric
would be the director uh he's done 24
other films of won countless Awards uh
tackling many complicated and difficult
subjects but this perhaps is the most
difficult uh of all uh and and and Corey
Casper uh is the head of global oncology
at the Fred Hutchinson cancer center uh
he's an expert in in vaccines and
infectious disease and public health uh
particularly expertise and kosi saroma
an adviser to the National Cancer uh
Advisory board on global Health uh this
book I don't know how many of you read
the book uh uh the Emperor of malades uh
came out in 2010 I think it was it's
been my privilege to know Sid Mukerji
the author of it uh as a matter of fact
he's very sorry he couldn't be here
himself uh I had the privilege of
interviewing him in Washington and then
once perhaps even on on this stage uh
long before anyone imagined that it
would even be possible to put this
extraordinary book uh into the form of a
documentary and interestingly Ken Burns
is also no stranger to the Aspen
Institute and and he has also uh been
here and I can understand why he would
be so eager to take this challenge uh on
let let me start with you Beric how how
uh and I think I read somewhere that you
were actually inspired to get into
document comies in part by Ken Burns but
how how did you get involved in this
particular project well it was quite
unexpected I I don't know Ken I did I
was a huge fan and he wasn't influential
in me getting into the field but I had
never worked with him before and then I
got a phone call one day and he said uh
hi this is Ken Burns and I said yeah
really who is this but it was Ken and
and he proceeded to tell me about this
extraordinary project it was going to be
the biggest film PBS did that year it
was based on this wonderful book uh
which I subsequently read and realized
was a wonderful book anyway he sort of
said would you be interested in doing
this and and it didn't take very long
for me to say yes well we're glad you
did um but you know I think for those of
us and I don't know how many of you saw
the full six hours on PBS and if you
haven't you'll want to go see it uh uh
after seeing seeing this 90 minutes or
so but it must have just been incredibly
challenging even with someone with your
portfolio to tackle something like this
I mean for a couple reasons first of all
the book itself I me is is is really
extraordinary it's it's a book of
History it starts with ancient Egypt and
goes to the frontiers of science uh it's
a book about serious complicated hard
science uh and of course and it's also a
work of literature it's philosophy but
it's also about cancer with its
complexity and emotion I mean was there
anything You' done before that could you
prepare this for this not really no uh
nor nor when we went out and looked for
precedents were there many to look at
but it was precisely for that reason
that it was so exciting the chance to do
something new to try to weave in one six
hour film the entire history of cancer
the the you know contemporary stories of
patients that would involve the audience
and then science that you spoke of that
presented a kind of unmissable Challenge
and you know even halfway through we we
had no idea if it would work if if
anybody would be able to follow these
stories when they were woven like this
and it you know to our happy surprise it
worked great well and you talk about the
stories and the stories just are are
amazing and and and of course Sid's book
is about stories but you couldn't use
those stories you had to find new story
how in the world were you able to get
the cooperation of these patients I mean
they were in situations they did not
know if the outcomes would be happy or
tragic right H I mean did you have to
talk to hundreds to get a few I mean how
you know it's surprising how many let me
step back we we we were lucky enough to
work with two extraordinary institutions
Johns Hopkins in Baltimore and a and a
smaller uh Community Hospital in West
Virginia called the Charleston area
Medical Center those two institutions
completely open their doors to us and
the doctors and nurses we met there
became very close to us and it was
through them that we found patience and
I think because these people they
trusted had given sort of their imprimer
to us um that gain trust with these
patients but even so it's it's an act of
courage and Faith to to put your life or
possibly your death in the hands of
someone you don't know to make a film
were were there any that you know were
taken out because you started with them
and then ma maybe tragedy occurred and
they just couldn't continue many for
many reasons we sometimes went through
an entire story and cut the entire story
and just felt that it wasn't adding
enough to the film but yes so we
probably had twice as many stories that
we didn't use as as we did did did you
have a a a goal in mind other than you
know an artistic aesthetic goal in terms
of what might be accomplished by this
film we you know we were very high on
the idea of of
really when I started this project as a
rank lay Layman I was under the
impression that there hadn't really been
progress in cancer you know we we hear a
lot of the bad news not so much the good
news and I wanted to make sure that the
people who view this program would
emerge on the other end with a lot more
hope and hope tempered by realism I mean
it's it's very easy to sort of say C is
coming which we all know is a much more
complicated story but because the
consensus out there was that there was a
lot of Hope and this was a period of
real optimism I wanted to get that
across to the public and that's such an
interesting point and I'm just going to
ask a few questions of of of of of Corey
as well and then for those of you who've
probably been here on the campus since 7
this morning and are still here so late
I want to give you a chance as as well
but I I think what what struck me was
you know the the very balance you talk
about because especially when you're
doing something like this you naturally
want to present hope
uh but you have to be realistic I mean
one of the things that's to me was
amazing about the book and so poetic
about it was almost this notion I mean
very clearly dispelled the no simplistic
notion that there will be a cure for a
cancer I mean there are many cancers
it's so complex as you see but there's
almost a thread to the book that indeed
the subtitle of the book is a biography
of cancer there's this sense in the book
that you know cancer is part of Who We
Are
you know that that that is that you know
that it is part of the human condition
and probably always will be and and then
you know how how do you and I think you
did a remarkable job and you know you
didn't cut out the things that were very
sad um is that something you discussed
as a team you know with Ken with Sid and
others this balance of optimism and and
reality we were highly conscious of it
all the way through and sit and
particular was very anxious that we not
convey false optimism false hope at the
same time I think even even you know
certainly Ken but even Sid was somewhat
taken aback by the uniformity of opinion
out there among the top people that we
talk to you know they they to a person
are extremely optimistic about the
future they have different timetables
but because of that strong optimism it
it became a consensus Among Us pretty
quickly that this is what we want to say
in the film and and Corey um let just
stay on this last point just for a
minute as as as an
oncologist um and working in an oncology
center and I also want to come back to
your particular involvement in in global
medicine you know I was thinking um not
the first time I saw the film but you
know that maybe one of the reasons that
that Ken Burns sounds maybe crazy was
interested in this is because of his
experience doing the Civil War because
in a sense you know there's a civil war
going on in our bodies you know with the
sense that that you know they're genes
that Keep Us Alive And they also kill us
but H how just tell us I don't know if
you've seen this before tonight if you
watch it but what was your reaction as
as as as a clinician and a scientist to
the film yeah I mean it's an incredible
film and I really congratulate you on on
the work that you've done um and it as
well it was a wonderful book and I think
that what I really uh I I think it
really struck me tonight as I saw it
again that um I think all of us in the
healthc care profession but especially
those of us who work in cancer see this
daily battle um to survive and it's a
strong battle uh the patience each day
but also the the need for patients and
for us as researchers and Physicians to
have hope um you know my career in
medicine started um in the beginning of
the HIV epidemic um and I trained in New
York City um and uh you know it was a
1700 Bed Hospital um and in that 1700
bed hospital every day there were 400
people dying of a disease that we didn't
understand and we couldn't treat um that
feeling of hopelessness um is a
miserable feeling and that's where your
interest in kosi saroma yeah that's that
was actually where I so many of the
patients who had HIV were dying of
cancer because when the immune system
fails uh the ability to to suppress
these viruses that can cause cancer uh
disappears and so there's a intricate
link between HIV and cancer just as
there's a link as you showed in your
film between immunotherapy or the
ability to harness the immune system and
fight cancer so this this early battle
um that constant I don't know if you
could say the war was being lost but
every day seeing patients lose that
battle against HIV um really instilled
hopelessness but a desperation for
something to be better and that then got
translated um to enormous hope so uh
towards the end of my medical training
HIV went from a disease that was
uniformly fatal to now a disease where I
mean I hate to say this but I have a
patient in Seattle who uh actually went
as far as to acquire HIV because that
qualified them for health insurance um
and they sort of saw the disease as one
that was survivable with a single pill
every day uh and didn't see it as a
particularly poor option so although
that's a horrible story it really shows
this Arc uh a story arc this was before
the Affordable Care Act correct um but
it really shows this Arc of um going
from hopelessness to Hope and what's
really exciting in my career now to see
this same sort of Arc now being played
out for cancer yeah one one of the
things that was so remarkable in what
you were able to do was to to is to show
people and and and families patients
dealing with this their emotions talking
openly with you which is amazing but it
made me think and also the film
respected this just how challenging it
has to be for Physicians and nurses to
have the same kind of conversations and
just talk to us a little bit about that
and that's also you know involves this
balance between hope and and realism and
and and just the enormous difficulty of
talking to people about this yeah I mean
to be the type of physician that I want
to be and I'd want to be caring for my
family uh or my friends um it's
exhausting and the reason it's
exhausting is because you have to put
yourself in the position of
understanding what that patient is going
through and you go through all of the
emotional sort of roller coasters that
they go through as well so this sense of
hopelessness but trying to inspire Hope
on a daily basis is tough and cancer is
a disease that does that like none I've
ever seen so you you go from the initial
diagnosis where you're sitting there
grasping at straws do you are you going
to survive what are your chances of
surviving what do the statistics tell
you to then trying to wrestle with what
is the treatment and treatments for
cancer has been have been so awful that
to contemplate that is almost as bad as
contemplating not surviving cancer but
now to to get into an era now where
there's targeted therapies that are less
tox toxic and more successful that you
know again that sort of um dialogue with
the patients has become such a I mean
it's a world different from your own
particular perspective what what are you
most optimistic and excited about in
terms of of of therapy and understanding
of cancer I mean do you feel as in the
film that immunotherapy is is going to
have extra I mean how do you feel about
I mean the part of the film that we saw
today was very focused on the enene and
the immune system and cancer and these
are no doubt incredibly important
aspects and we heard a little bit about
something called the tumor genome Atlas
And this is an incredibly uh complicated
process by which we're trying to
understand all of the molecular
underpinings of cancer not just the
enchor not just IM the immune system but
all of it and what's incredibly exciting
is where that work is even now starting
to take us so that project for instance
a very interesting when you think of
cancers that you definitely would not
want to have you think about something
like ovarian cancer where the survival
is so so poor so this tumor genome Atlas
project showed that actually ovarian
cancer is not one cancer and that if you
look at people who respond to treatment
versus those that don't there actually
are four different types of ovarian
cancer that can be described by
describing your T tumor genome and now
knowing that first of all you don't have
to expose people who won't benefit from
that therapy but more so you can
actually seek out what would be
appropriate therapy so what I see is the
next exciting is sort of now the problem
is that the data from this project are
enormous you're getting you know
billions of pieces of information on
each tumor in each person and to process
that and make sense of it is incredibly
complicated but that will happen it's
already starting to happen and that's
where I see the real excitement
developing more targeted therapies for
cancer that are not toxic highly
effective and that's where I think I see
great hope and I ask you one question
then I want to open it up uh you you
know you're involved in global health
and one of the things that when when I
saw this I don't remember hearing much
about is cost and expense and who's
paying for these
therapies and and as big a question as
that is for someone in interested in
global health and uh you think about the
disparities I mean these kinds of
therapies are are available to many
Americans uh and whether they're at
John's Hopkins or in West Virginia but
if they're in in
Zambia uh or most of the countries in
the world they're not yeah so you know
cancer truly is the Emperor of all
maladies and you know um when most
people think of cancer they think of it
as being a disease of being wealthy or
affluent um but two-thirds of all of the
new cancer cases this year are in low
and middle- inome countries so it really
resource poor settings are suffering the
bird burden of cancer more than we are
and as you point out have very little
access to care so in most parts of
subsaharan Africa for every 10 new
cancer diagnoses there are nine cancer
deaths whereas in the United States for
every 10 new cancer diagnoses there are
two cancer deaths and not only is there
are there no therapies because there's
not even morphine there's not morphine
um there's one oncologist for 100
million people I mean there are one one
for 100 million million people yeah so
there are significant challenges and so
in some senses um the you know uh cancer
in in other parts of the world looks a
lot like it did in Boston in the 1940s
um the wards look the same The Sounds
the smells look the same um but the
again where I'm hopeful um is that we
have the ability to make cancer there a
much more survivable disease and more so
we have the ability to do something that
I call reverse innovate so as cancer
becomes more expensive more complicated
in resource Rich settings we have the
ability to look at what works in
resource po core settings and really
Embrace those as a standard of care um
as opposed to always having to grasp for
the most expensive treatment so I think
that there's hope there as well thank
you I want to go to the audience if we
have questions we have a few minutes
before you can all go to sleep uh I
think do we have
microphone yes I can't see so please ah
May wonderful film and I'm actually
curious about how long it took to make
this film in terms of a six-hour film
how much footage how much time did it
take to shoot in total I mean it's right
well it took the the team about four
years I was on it for only about three
years but that someone preceded me um so
that involved probably almost a thousand
hours of shooting we embedded two Crews
at these two different hospitals for
over a year shooting almost every day so
you can imagine the quantity of footage
that's just just the those were just the
varit stories we had more than 100
interviews goes on and on so just
managing that volume was something I'd
never done in my career even close and
figuring out how to carve a story even a
six- hour story out of that amount of
material was a fascinating process and
you know difficult and challenging but
ultimately very satisfying
process yes we I right here in the
middle
it wasn't clear what happened to the
other twin I assume he passed but yeah
unfortunately quite clear when you pull
excerpts out of the film you tend to
drop some pieces but uh Robert Sandler
did die what happened was that after
this brief period of of remission uh
achieved by this one drug it wore off
very quickly in a matter of a few months
and all of the original children who got
this um regimen ended up dying including
Robert and there's a very touching scene
where his identical twin remembers the
last time they they saw each other and
you know and what's interesting about
Robert's story is that not only was he
the first child to show that
chemotherapy could work but
um it would it showed how Sydney Farber
was willing despite failure to keep
trying and that's what really what the
history of cancer shows is people who
are borderline ruthless but have a goal
in mind like I mean frich in the film um
those are the people we need as
difficult as they sometimes are as
ethically gray as they sometimes are
those people with a vision and boldness
like a Farber like a frich uh are
responsible for the the many gains we've
made um and so that's one of the themes
of the film is to show that kind of
dynamic I mean I'd point out that I
think that the clips we saw today were
very much focused on a lot of the
Pioneers the researchers and that was
nice for me to see but um but I also
think you did a nice job focusing on the
patients but you know there's a
statistic that is another sort of I
think very striking statistic which is
that only 3% of cancer patients in the
United States actually participate in
clinical trials um you can see that none
of these these gains would be possible
without the participation in a clinical
trial so it's a it's another issue that
we really have to face um we heard a lot
over the last couple of days about
challenges of funding for medical
research but I think the other challenge
is really uh getting us to embrace um
research as really the only way forward
um these are things these are gains we
can only make through through this type
of work does are do these films have a
continuing life I mean what what what
happens now what is PBS doing are there
are there continuing Outreach efforts
talk to us about tremendous I mean this
film was always only a part of a much
bigger uh initiative which involved all
sorts of education and print material
and getting the book reissued and and it
was all with an eye towards trying to
extend the the longevity I mean when I
started my career we made documentaries
and they were on once and they
disappeared Into The Ether now people
have gotten very good and PBS in
particular has gotten very good at
really extending the life of their films
and and having them kind of disseminate
through the The Ether the ecosystem so
um that's going to happen with this film
and it's just beginning now are you
still on road shows I think this might
be my last Road show for for good and I
well I hope you enjoy it then has been
great um but the film will go on without
me another another
question
yes yes I'm I'm interested in the use of
vaccines um as quotes cure for cancer
and what's the difference between the
immuno therapy and and the vaccine
therapy is is that like related it's uh
you know it's a subtle difference so um
the concept with a vaccine direct so
these are called therapeutic vaccines as
opposed to what we typically think of a
vaccin a preventive vaccines but it's
the same concept so you're trying to
train the immune system to focus on a
specific protein or constellation of
proteins and direct the immune system to
attack those proteins and for
therapeutic cancer vaccines the thought
is is that you can cause just as you saw
in that clip from the film um the immune
system typically um is is distracting
and is not able to focus on cancer cells
but by doing a therapeutic vaccine the
thought is is that you can raise the
immune system back up against those
abnormal cells and eliminate them
there's a lot of challenges so um One
Challenge about cancer as opposed to
infectious diseases is that cancer is
you it's part of you and so your body is
trained your immune system is trained
not to reject yourself and so it's very
hard for your body to differentiate
between a cancer cell which is a part of
you and let's say a bacteria or a virus
which is foreign so one of the problems
with these vaccines is you're trying to
overcome a very you know uh basic
mechanism of the immune system to not
attack yourself and so that's something
that these therapeutic cancer vaccines
are trying to get over and there's
progress in that but um that's one
Challenge and the Second Challenge is
obviously knowing which of the multiple
proteins that cancers make to Target but
I think that there's great promise now
um with therapeutic vaccines and I think
that they will have part of the role
with immunotherapy immunotherapy the
nice thing is it works on a strategy
that doesn't require knowing um exactly
what to attack It generally increases
the immune response to your cancer um
and it's a little bit of a broader
approach than a vaccine or a therapeutic
vaccine but both are part of I'd say a
super family of things called
immunotherapy it's 10 o'clock but if
there's one quick
question we
have we have another
question I can't
can't tell I guess not so I would simply
like to thank all of you for being here
so late this evening and our two
wonderful panelists thank
you